---
title: 'On Academic Service'
date: 2020-11-16
permalink: /posts/2020/11/On-Academic-Service/
redirect_from:
  - "/posts/2020-11-16-Service.md"
  - "/posts/2020-11-16-Service"
  - "/posts/2020-11-16-Service/"
tags:
  - teams
  - service
  - peer review
  - modern peer review
  - traditional peer review
  - pre-print
  - bioRxiv
  - doi
---

# On Academic Service #
> My thoughts on academic service.

# Definitions #
1. [Service](#what-is-service?)
2. [Peer Review](#what-is-peer-review?)
3. [Traditional Peer Review](#what-is-traditional-peer-review?)
4. [Modern Peer Review](#what-is-modern-peer-review?)

## What is *service*? ##
I see ***service*** as the unexpected contributions I make to any team with which I identify. This atypical definition requires an explanation of team membership and what that means to me.

### Where do **teams** enter this equation? ###
Contributing helpfully as a part of a team is fundamentally important to me. Whether it has been cheering for the [Kansas City Chiefs](https://www.chiefs.com/), leading my teammates as co-captain of the [Stanford fencing team](https://gostanford.com/sports/fencing/roster/max-murphy/3668), or working during the small hours of the night when my assistance is required on a project, I have always relished the feelings associated with surprising my team members through some unexpected contribution or effort. "Team player" is at the core of my identity. 

### Why **"unexpected"** contributions? ###
Due to my existential fixation on team membership, I do not mind contributing to teams in ways that do not "earn credit." In basketball, a player exhibiting these qualities would be described as having a lot of "hustle," "intangibles," or sometimes "basketball IQ." By striving to exert the "intangibles" as they apply to all aspects of my own life, I hope that I am able to touch the lives of those around me in a positive way. Therefore, I refuse to embed a laundry-list of events, committees, or other politically-motivated tasks on my personal website. I believe stating this refusal outright says more about the kind of person I am (and at least gives a fair indication that I am a stubborn person). Please enquire with *anyone* whose team I've had the pleasure to be a part of, if you would like a fairer evaluation to this question than I could ever provide.

In this description, service is heterogeneous and almost always specific to circumstances (and the individuals involved). Team contributions counting as service are "unexpected" not because there is no expectation of a contribution; it is the contrary: individuals going beyond what is "reasonable" and producing a contribution that was not requested of them. In my experience, such an "unexpected" contribution has resulted many times from the incredible intuitions or efforts made by my collaborators causing me to pause, reflect, and appreciate my good fortune in having the opportunity to work with such incredible teammates. Therefore, my personal definition of service is a synthesis of my gratitude for all of my teammates and the associated self-identification I have formed with my cherished teams: I will continue to strive for excellence so that my own contributions to any team project could produce the same joy or inspiration in my teammates as they have produced in me.

## What is *peer review*? ##
Broadly, peer review is the act of appraising oneself of the work of peers within a field dedicated to the inquiry and advancement of knowledge pertaining to a specific subject matter. In this process of appraisal, the appraiser may: 

1. Learn something new about specific subject matter of interest.
2. Take methodological or semantic affront to the manner in which the contents of a work are reported. 
3. Generate fundamentally new insights about ongoing experiments, potentially expanding their interpretation.
4. Generate fundamnetally new insights about the interpretation of reported results, which were not offered by the original authors. 
5. Misunderstand the works as they are presented, which may require seeking out the authors in order to get a better idea of some aspect of the reported works.
6. Identify an ethical failure in the reported works.
7. Identify simple errors or oversights in the reported works.

The list could go on, but it is evident that there are many reasons why it is good that we read one another's works, try our best to understand them, and hold open discussions within our application-specific communities of practice. From this list, it can be seen that the act of peer review encompasses many benefits for both parties that engage in it. Without contrived barriers, there are really only three (or maybe only two-and-a-half) requirements for this process to flourish, conferring its many corrective and predictive benefits: [time](#time), [media](#media), and [sensibility](#sensibility). 

### **Time** ###
 It is not without good reason that the popular notion of the absent-minded scientist emerged. The **time** required for completing a given task is often trivialized in academic science. In the context of [peer review](#what-is-peer-review?), time is simply the duration that an appraiser of a given work is willing to spend interpreting its contents in order to understand them and their application in a broader sense. With the increasing methodological complexity of experiments requiring expertise not only within the life science domains, but also in the realms of math, statistics, and engineering, the time requirement in order to simply read and truly understand a paper is a non-trivial fact that is seemingly always glossed over by those wishing to imply that they have read and understand all the relevant literature regarding a particular subject matter.

### **Media** ###
Although the **[printing press](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printing_press)** was in fair use around Europe by 1500, it was not until over 150 years later that the **[first academic journal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Journal_des_s%C3%A7avans)** was published. It would not be until 1731 that the **[first fully peer-reviewed](https://www.aje.com/en/arc/scholarly-publishing-brief-history/)** journal was launched by the Royal Society of Edinburgh. So we can see that from the outset, even the *[traditional peer review](#what-is-traditional-peer-review?)* model was somewhat slow to gain traction. Clearly, science ([even in its modern form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes)) was able to exist and advance itself without a bureaucratic heirarchy of journal editors and review panels. Nonetheless, the advent of a standardized **media** (the journals) for aggregating and disseminating scientific evidence (and the associated methodological underpinnings related to the experiments producing said evidence) surely improved the rate at which new knowledge was acquired, curated, and logically sorted out. 

### **Sensibility** ###
While **sensibility** is not a "strict" criterion for the peer review process, my anecdotal experience in dealing with a reviewer who (in my opinion) asked a stupid and pointless question that was only there to delay the publication of the results that would ever be of interest to others was "just put up with it because it's better to not offend them." I don't see that sentiment as having any place in scientific inquiry, and perhaps that's why I'm writing this piece to begin with (it should be noted that I did address the reviewer's comment--it was unhelpful--and the manuscript was published). My opinion is that the whole business of "having peers" implies the necessity of this component. Vonnegut might have summed this up as "just be good, damnit."

## What is ***traditional** peer review*? ##
I use *traditional* to qualify *[peer review](#what-is-peer-review?)* with reference to the standard model that is typically invoked when a scientist says "time to write a paper" after concluding experiments and analysis of the results. As a graduate student, this process seems to involve an endless list of people (real or often nebulous) whose opinions regarding one item or another are important checkboxes in order to move to the next step in career advancement. 
### 1 **Drafting** ###
The first step is good: immediate interaction and feedback with peers who are immediately adjacent-to and interested-in the results of the reported works. This is often quite productive collaboration and involves direct feedback from experts in disparate fields whose blended insight and background serve to directly enhance the interpretation and reporting on experimental results. 

### 2 **Approval** ###
The next step requires formatting things into a "final draft" that is acceptable to the senior authors on the paper. As the graduate student progresses through his or her career, it is most likely that in the beginning the senior authors will need to take an active roll and hopefully they do this in a way that is instructive to the student. My experience is that I've benefited from that interaction and I'm grateful for that structure.

While this relationship should benefit the graduate student in the beginning, it seems only fair that it should benefit the senior authors by the end. If the student is prudently developing his or her experiments that are based on furthering some particular knowledge frontier, he or she should quickly become a world expert in that hyper-specific application of knowledge. The experimental design, which in the beginning is most likely guided by the overarching themes and goals of the senior authors in the lab of the graduate student, likely addresses a question that is fundamentally important to one or more grants funding the lab. At this point, rather than an instructor, the senior author takes a less-active role in the development and direction of the paper. A primary motivator for the student to have the senior author on the paper is the "name-brand recognition" of the more prestigious senior author, coupled with the fact that the senior author's grants most likely pay the submission fees. These depend upon the journal, but will typically run you $1k-$2k depending on which options are selected and how much you want the editor to "like you" (*looking at you, "Golden Open Access Fee"*). To the senior author's benefit, the work is cited and "claimed" on the supporting grant's inevitable progress report. So we can see that this is "how the world goes around," when it comes to the business of academic publishing--at least before those pesky reviewers enter the picture.

### 3 **Review** ###  
By the time that the publication enters the "peer review" process, approval becomes a game of chance. Younger reviewers, who may feel that they have something to prove by being newly invited to this arena in which they have gained some ability to influence *any* decision-making, may provide unduly harsh criticisms. Conversely, senior reviewers may approve a manuscript that they really have no business evaluating. 

My experience is that I have never been requested to assist in the peer review process (not entirely true, but of the requests that I've received they struck me more likely to be scams in the traditional sense than academic texts). I have spent an inordinate amount of time working with the rat pellet retrieval task, to the point that I believe I could be considered an expert in that area. I presented my work at the annual society for neuroscience meeting twice during the poster sessions. During that time, I investigators from around the world spoke with me and some of those investigators also study rat pellet retrievals. I also actively sought out investigators during their poster sessions in order to make connections. So, while I know which investigators *I* would request, no request has ever been made for my input on their experiments. 

Unfortunately, the optimistic interpretation dictates my unsolicited opinion was due to the assumption that I do not possess the faculty to provide helpful insights or additions. The alternative is my opinion was actively avoided, for fear that I could produce a sound rationale as to why the study should be swiftly rejected. I think this second possibility is unlikely; I do not pretend to have an IQ of more than 100, and most of the time, I simply get by with hard work. It takes me a long **[time](#time)** to get through journal articles but I read them to the best of my ability. Therefore, I could understand the former interpretation (although I think my opinion could be helpful nonetheless). I certainly am not looking to inhibit the ability of a hard-working scientist to share and disseminate the results of their difficult experiments. 

Regardless, I think it is fair of me to express, at an emotional level (and in my own blog post), disappointment that my opinion was never sought by those whom I considered as my peers or better. Fortunately, as I will argue in the following **[opinion](#opinion)** section, I've been able to seek out and actively engage with the scientific peer review process by simply [identifying pre-prints](#modern-peer-review-and-pre-print-archives) and making comments on them or e-mailing the author directly. 

# Opinion #
At the current stage of my career (having just defended my doctoral thesis), the question of service in an academic sense seems to largely pertain to peer review and probably not as much toward serving on committees, sitting on review panels, or in general doing anything that involves making decisions about where resources are allocated. **I refuse to participate in journal-initiated peer review.** This post clarifies my position, which does not dispute the importance of [peer review](#what-is-peer-review?), but rather the best way to go about it. My argument is that although *[traditional peer review](#what-is-traditional-peer-review?)* has been made **[obsolete](https://www.doi.org/)**, journal-initiated peer review persists due to cultural inertia, preventing new criteria which embrace *[modern peer review](#what-is-modern-peer-review?)* from growing to widespread recognition.

## Why don't you participate in *traditional peer review*? ##
Insofar as "academic teams," I see myself as a part of some larger and abstract entity chipping away at the wholly inadequate state of healthcare when it comes to rehabilitation from injury to the nervous system. One of the basic ways to contribute to that team is to provide feedback in the form of *[peer review](#what-is-peer-review?)*. However, *peer review* has changed its meaning in the past 20 years. Today, team membership that requires *peer review* need not overlap with *traditional peer review*. More specifically, it is no longer necessary (other than for practical means of self-advancement) to go through the cumbersome peer review process that has been the province of academically-mediated journals for the past few centuries. This is because of technological advancements that have radically altered the communication **[media](#media)** we use in peer review to begin with. Today, there are only two **media** requirements, and they are both inexpensive.

1. A publicly accessible host site for a formatted manuscript and images. This is easy enough, with free collaborative tools such as Google Documents (this website is hosted freely via GitHub-Pages). In my field of study, **[bioRxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/)** is where most of the interesting papers of note originate before they are eventually published elsewhere "for credit." 
2. A way to reliably retrieve that information once it is "officially" hosted. This service is provided by a **[digital object identifier (DOI)](https://apastyle.apa.org/learn/faqs/what-is-doi)**. While not free, this form of reliable labeling is quite inexpensive ($1 per paper for the DOI--$4.75 per paper in total even after considering hosting services--several orders of magnitude less than paper fees) as documented in the transparent cost model reported by the **[Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/about#costs)**.

I don't believe there is any argument to be made regarding paper versus electronic formatting. It is frustrating that I am required to cater my paper format, which could be improved tremendously by including interactive figures (as would be done by any consulting firm making a dashboard for clients), to dinosaurs who "want their printed copy." It is even more infuriating when I am held up in the process of reporting results by feedback indicating that someone "does not like my drawing of a rat" or "thinks the color scheme is funky." I happen to hate traditional color schemes because my color blindness makes certain colors difficult for me to distinguish.

## What is ***modern** peer review*? ##
***Modern peer review*** is the act of curating freely-available content on the Internet using one's own spare time to provide constructive feedback in the form of site-specific comment threads (in which case peer review attribution is possible for the reviewer), or directly to the content authors via e-mail or other medium (in the case that the reviewer is either shy or comments are critical to the point that anonymity is required). 
* *Modern peer review **is*** performed actively, frequently, and on an individual basis. 
  + *Modern peer review* does not require an invitation. Up-and-coming scientists with good ideas can provide constructive feedback that would be just as helpful or valid as someone who has been in a field for 20 years. Similarly, someone who has been in a field for a long time is no longer able to stagnate a field simply because they do not agree with trivial semantics of some term or phrase.
* *Modern peer review **is*** driven by a need to stay appraised of work that is directly related to subjects of interest. 
  + Rather than serving as a strategic point of acknowledgment that is carefully and prudently developed via social networking that occurs over tens of years specifically for the purpose of augmenting the competitive appeal of requests for funding (i.e. grant proposals), the act of performing modern peer review is born of a desire to simply stay appraised of the current state of understanding within a scientific field. This means that *modern peer review* is a more sincere form of scientific inquiry and advancement than *traditional peer review.*
* *Modern peer review **is*** efficient.
  + The fastest way to receive critical feedback about an idea or concept is to post it on the Internet. Most modern journal articles contain at least one author in the author list who has gained a following in his or her respective field. As long as a pre-print article is associated to the most recognizable author's [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=CUGkYf8AAAAJ&hl=en) account, then other responsible scientists will receive a notification that the pre-print has been uploaded and/or edited. This is a ***much* faster** way to notify the relevant parties of new works in their field than the *traditional* model, which relies on a third-party system (leading to the next point)...

* *Modern peer review **is not*** mediated by a third-party.
  + The journal-based model of *traditional peer review* requires an **editor** or **editorial board.** This entity is charged with fielding incoming works (which typically contain a cover letter describing the relevance and suitability of the works contained to be published in a given journal), making an initial determination of their suitability to send out for review, then sending the works to peers capable of their constructive evaluation. Selection of peers depends on a number of factors, but will involve some combination between the list of reviewers suggested by the manuscript author(s) and those the relevant editor deems acceptable. Unfortunately, by the time a journal editor becomes a journal editor, his or her closest peers may also be similarly busy and therefore unavailable to field such requests in a timely fashion. Furthermore, the more that the editorial duties increase, the less-engaged the editor becomes with the overseen area of scientific inquiry. 
  + **Modern peer review does not require an editor**. Peers are directly connected either by outright exploration (on the part of the reviewer, who is seeking knowledge), or by past interactions (a Google Scholar citation alert, which provides an e-mail notification as soon as a followed author updates their Google Scholar profile with the newly submitted article). This latter connection is likely formed by peers with similar subject interests as they learn of one another's work via independent study and/or through meetings and shared discourse at conferences and workshops. None of these things requires an editor or fancy overhead fees.
* *Modern peer review **is not*** politically motivated. 
  + Most prestigious journals require a "novelty" component implying that included work is only suitable for publication if it addresses a particularly new idea, resolves a critical challenge, or raises substantially interesting new questions about the relevant subject matter. Work that validates or extends a past idea does not meet this definition. Therefore, groups with similar or competing objectives have an adverse incentive to "delay" the publication of scholarly works by hampering publication and dissemination in high profile journals by framing pointless inquiries in the format of seemingly constructive criticisms. 
  + **Modern peer review puts the burden of responsibility for gating public dissemination of research results (or their retraction) onto the individual researcher.** If your work is bad or incorrect, take it down or run the risk of widespread public ire! The proof is in the pudding, so to speak. In order for this to work in practice, sites like [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/) (and its subsidiaries) must find a better way to **permanently record the history of changes** for *any* work that has been submitted. This way, any mistake persists forever in the public eye. It should be noted that this is not a challenging problem for markdown and html text-based documents: all that is required would be a system similar to that used by `git` for code repositories.

### **Modern peer review and pre-print archives** ###
The journal-based model of *[traditional peer review](#what-is-traditional-peer-review?)* had its place prior to the Internet. Two major objectives of journals was:

1. Provide a way to disseminate works to a large audience, and
2. Provide a common contact point for experts within a field to give feedback on one another's works.

Too often, I hear these fundamental purposes ignored in discussions about the role of academic journals and whether "peer review is dead." **Peer review is not dead!** While the journals may die, the scientific process (and on its coattails, the concept of peer review) will endure. 


# Conclusion #

In summary, the *[traditional peer review](#what-is-traditional-peer-review?)* model served an important role and is intricately tied to physical press. With the rise of decentralized, digital content, the journals have to seriously retool their arsenal and part of this will be coming to terms with exorbitant pricing and archaic philosophies about what peer review **is**. The traditional model, **[in my experience](#3-review)**, is about elitism, connections, and nepotism (in the sense of an "academic family" tree). The rise of so-called "anti-science" movements in Western countries should be an important cultural litmus indicator that the academic norm is totally and completely unacceptable. Moving forward, the academic process needs not only greater transparency and data sharing, as have been repeatedly been called for in the last decade, but the complete and total abolition of the archaic journal-based peer review system. Pre-print archives, such as [aRxiv](#modern-peer-review-and-pre-print-archives) are on the right track, but need to make subtle but significant improvements before the system can make the "full jump."

## What will happen when the journals die? ##

As tenured investigators persist in already-saturated fields, it directly drives an increase in competition for scarce faculty positions. These coveted positions are rightfully claimed by those with a track record of excellent publications, which are more-often-than-not in journals that have high impact factors within their respective field. **To be clear, despite many criticisms of its contents, I actually *enjoy* reading the journal [Nature](https://www.nature.com/)**. The very high quality of work presented therein is exemplary and the exposure to subject matter across a wide range of fields that I would never think to explore otherwise is invaluable. As long as the very best journals maintain their rigorous standards of excellence, I believe there will always be a place (at least to some extent) for journal services in academic literature. We just can't all be Nature. 

The first to go must be the worst perpetrators of egregious injustice: the "pay-to-play" model contrived by [predatory publishers such as Elsevier](https://libraries.mit.edu/scholarly/publishing/elsevier-fact-sheet/). During my graduate studies at the University of Kansas, I often couldn't access literature because an article was behind a paywall. A library loan request could take weeks to arrive, and am I really going to do it if I am not even 100% sure that the article is relevant to begin with? After all, the fact that I am looking to read the article may mean I am uncertain of the methodological elevance of the work to my own to begin with. 

A particularly hilarious example is that I could not retrieve the final (formatted) version of my own manuscript published with **[Journal of Neural Engineering](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1741-2552/ab3319)**. I can only imagine the profiteering owners of such publication syndicates twisting their cartoon-villain moustaches as they cackle: "and then we ordained that *they* have to take **ethics** courses about ***self-plagiariasm*** bwa-ha-ha-ha!" These heinous villains must be stopped. 

## Honestly man I'm just trying to graduate, what do you want me to do? ##
It's not that bad, and you can help! Remember, you are a paying customer and you've been paying exorbitantly for overpriced services for far too long. Here's what you can do to help:

1. **Always** put your manuscript on pre-print archives. 
2. Apply to Nature, and when you are rejected:
3. Go to a Nature subsidiary, they're still prettty good.
4. If that doesn't work, it's fine. Your work is in a publicly accessible format. As long as you are pleased that it is useful, it probably is.
5. If you're not confident that it's useful, then why did you try submitting it to begin with? You probably should have evaluated this prior to step 2. 
6. Maybe you will never be confident that it's useful. That's okay it takes all kinds of people to make the world go round. In this case, find someone you are confident knows your subject matter well, and solicit their opinion of the manuscript. Address any concerns or comments they raise as objectively and honestly as you can, and if you aren't sure what the heck they are talking about, go and teach yourself.
7. Repeat step 6 as many times as necessary with different peers until you have completed the peer review process.
8. Congratulations you have probably produced something that will be valuable to someone someday. And you did it without the help of the journals, unless steps 2 or 3 worked for you (in which case, **CONGRATULATIONS**- that's a huge accomplishment in my opinion!)

So there you have it. It won't take a lot, but we need all the scientists to realize how badly they're getting ripped off and unfortunately, back to the oblivious absent-minded scientist popular-culture notion, there's a reason it exists. Even if we can change our peer review model in half the time it took to adopt the journal-based system, we will be well on our way to a new era of scientific progress.
