---
title: "Comprehensive spatial analysis of the Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteome reveals a compartmentalization bias toward the bacterial surface"
collection: publications
category: publications
type: publications
layout: manuscript
permalink: /publications/2017-01-09-Borrelia/
redirect_from:
  - "/publications/2017-01-09-Borrelia.html"
  - "/publications/2017-01-09-Borrelia"
excerpt: 'This paper is about the localization of lipoproteins to a particular side and layer of the bilayer membrane of Borrelia, the causative agent of Lyme disease. It is a descriptive study that catalogues this specific property of each putative lipoprotein identified in the Borrelia lipoproteome.'
date: 2017-01-09
venue: 'Journal of Bacteriology'
paperurl: 'https://jb.asm.org/content/jb/199/6/e00658-16.full.pdf'
citation: 'Dowdell, A. S., Murphy, M. D., Azodi, C., Swanson, S. K., Florens, L., Chen, S., Zuckert, W. R. (2017). Comprehensive spatial analysis of the Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteome reveals a compartmentalization bias toward the bacterial surface. Journal of bacteriology, 199(6).'
assesses: Borrelia Lipoproteome
educationalLevel: advanced
author_profile: true
tags:
  - borrelia
  - burgdorferi
  - lipoprotein
  - lyme disease
keywords:
  - borrelia
  - burgdorferi
  - lipoprotein
  - lyme disease
---

The Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi is unique among bacteria in its large number of lipoproteins that are encoded by a small, exceptionally fragmented, and predominantly linear genome. Peripherally anchored in either the inner or outer membrane and facing either the periplasm or the external environment, these lipoproteins assume varied roles. A prominent subset of lipoproteins functioning as the apparent linchpins of the enzootic tick-vertebrate infection cycle have been explored as vaccine targets. Yet, most of the B. burgdorferi lipoproteome has remained uncharacterized. Here, we comprehensively and conclusively localize the B. burgdorferi lipoproteome by applying established protein localization assays to a newly generated epitope-tagged lipoprotein expression library and by validating the obtained individual protein localization results using a sensitive global mass spectrometry approach. The derived consensus localization data indicate that 86 of the 125 analyzed lipoproteins encoded by B. burgdorferi are secreted to the bacterial surface. Thirty-one of the remaining 39 periplasmic lipoproteins are retained in the inner membrane, with only 8 lipoproteins being anchored in the periplasmic leaflet of the outer membrane. The localization of 10 lipoproteins was further defined or revised, and 52 surface and 23 periplasmic lipoproteins were newly localized. Cross-referencing prior studies revealed that the borrelial surface lipoproteome contributing to the host-pathogen interface is encoded predominantly by plasmids. Conversely, periplasmic lipoproteins are encoded mainly by chromosomal loci. These studies close a gap in our understanding of the functional lipoproteome of an important human pathogen and set the stage for more in-depth studies of thus-far-neglected spirochetal lipoproteins.

[Download paper here](https://jb.asm.org/content/jb/199/6/e00658-16.full.pdf)
