---
title: "Chronic stability of single-channel neurophysiological correlates of gross and fine reaching movements in the rat"
collection: publications
category: publications
permalink: /publications/2019-10-30-Bundy/
redirect_from:
  - "/publications/2019-10-30-Bundy.html"
  - "/publications/2019-10-30-Bundy"
excerpt: 'Rats were trained on a &apos;gross&apos; and &apos;fine&apos; forelimb task, implanted with microwire arrays spanning unilateral sensorimotor cortex contralateral to the moving limb, and then tested over the course of days and weeks to determine the longitudinal stability of both spiking unit signals as well as gamma LFP in this context.'
date: 2019-10-30
venue: 'PLoS ONE'
paperurl: 'https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0219034&type=printable'
citation: 'Bundy, D. T., Guggenmos, D. J., Murphy, M. D., Nudo, R. J. (2019). Chronic stability of single-channel neurophysiological correlates of gross and fine reaching movements in the rat. PloS one, 14(10), e0219034.'
author_profile: true
tags:
  - rat
  - reaching
  - motor
  - neurophysiology
  - spike
  - lfp
  - cortex
---

While substantial task-related neural activity has been observed during motor tasks in rodent primary motor cortex and premotor cortex, the long-term stability of these responses in healthy rats is uncertain, limiting the interpretability of longitudinal changes in the specific patterns of neural activity associated with learning or motor recovery following injury. This study examined the stability of task-related neural activity associated with execution of two distinct reaching tasks in healthy rodents. A novel automated rodent behavioral apparatus was constructed and rats were trained to perform a reaching task combining a ‘gross’ lever press and a ‘fine’ pellet retrieval. In each animal, two chronic microelectrode arrays were implanted in motor cortex spanning the caudal forelimb area (rodent primary motor cortex) and the rostral forelimb area (rodent premotor cortex). We recorded multiunit spiking and local field potential activity from 10 days to 7–10 weeks post-implantation to characterize the patterns of neural activity observed during each task component and analyzed the consistency of channel-specific task-related neural activity. Task-related changes in neural activity were observed on the majority of channels. While the task-related changes in multi-unit spiking and local field potential spectral power were consistent over several weeks, spectral power changes were more stable, despite the trade-off of decreased spatial and temporal resolution. These results show that neural activity in rodent primary and premotor cortex is associated with specific phases of reaching movements with stable patterns of task-related activity across time, establishing the relevance of the rodent for future studies designed to examine changes in task-related neural activity during recovery from focal cortical lesions.

[Download paper here](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0219034&type=printable)

Recommended citation: Bundy, D. T., Guggenmos, D. J., Murphy, M. D., Nudo, R. J. (2019). Chronic stability of single-channel neurophysiological correlates of gross and fine reaching movements in the rat. PloS one, 14(10), e0219034.